@tindex font
@anchor{Class font}
@deftp {Class} {font}
Class precedence list: @code{@lw{font}, @lw{standard-object}, @lw{t}}

Slots:
@itemize
@item @code{family} --- initarg: @code{@w{:family}}; reader: @code{@w{clx-truetype:font-family}}; writer: @code{@w{(setf clx-truetype:font-family)}}

Font family.
@item @code{subfamily} --- initarg: @code{@w{:subfamily}}; reader: @code{@w{clx-truetype:font-subfamily}}; writer: @code{@w{(setf clx-truetype:font-subfamily)}}

Font subfamily. For e.g. regular, italic, bold, bold italib.
@item @code{size} --- initarg: @code{@w{:size}}; reader: @code{@w{clx-truetype:font-size}}; writer: @code{@w{(setf clx-truetype:font-size)}}

Font size in points.
@item @code{underline} --- initarg: @code{@w{:underline}}; reader: @code{@w{clx-truetype:font-underline}}; writer: @code{@w{(setf clx-truetype:font-underline)}}

Draw line under text string.
@item @code{strikethrough} --- initarg: @code{@w{:strikethrough}}; reader: @code{@w{clx-truetype:font-strikethrough}}; writer: @code{@w{(setf clx-truetype:font-strikethrough)}}

Draw strike through text string.
@item @code{overline} --- initarg: @code{@w{:overline}}; reader: @code{@w{clx-truetype:font-overline}}; writer: @code{@w{(setf clx-truetype:font-overline)}}

Draw line over text string.
@item @code{background} --- initarg: @code{@w{:background}}; reader: @code{@w{clx-truetype:font-background}}; writer: @code{@w{(setf clx-truetype:font-background)}}

Background color.
@item @code{foreground} --- initarg: @code{@w{:foreground}}; reader: @code{@w{clx-truetype::font-foreground}}; writer: @code{@w{(setf clx-truetype::font-foreground)}}

Foreground color.
@item @code{overwrite-gcontext} --- initarg: @code{@w{clx-truetype::overwrite-gcontext}}; reader: @code{@w{clx-truetype:font-overwrite-gcontext}}; writer: @code{@w{(setf clx-truetype:font-overwrite-gcontext)}}

Use font values for background and foreground colors.
@item @code{antialias} --- initarg: @code{@w{clx-truetype::antialias}}; reader: @code{@w{clx-truetype:font-antialias}}; writer: @code{@w{(setf clx-truetype:font-antialias)}}

Antialias text string.
@item @code{string-bboxes} --- reader: @code{@w{clx-truetype::font-string-bboxes}}; writer: @code{@w{(setf clx-truetype::font-string-bboxes)}}

Cache for bboxes
@item @code{string-line-bboxes} --- reader: @code{@w{clx-truetype::font-string-line-bboxes}}; writer: @code{@w{(setf clx-truetype::font-string-line-bboxes)}}

Cache for bboxes
@end itemize

Class for representing font information.
@end deftp
